There's an interview with Curtis Mayfield on Rhino's 2xCD reissue of his Super Fly soundtrack that puts the contradictions of blaxploitation cinema's relationship with soul music into sharp, clear terms. "For film, I usually would follow a script, and the script and its contents and all the characters and what the story was about would basically furnish me with ideas and depth to get actually into the happenings of that particular movie for scoring. However, when you're writing, just in general, you use the society and the happenings about yourself, the observances-- that becomes your script." The perception of life through the lens of entertainment came through two separate channels when the rise of black action films in the 1970s coincided with the peak of soul music's conscious period. And when those two art forms combined in an attempt to define African-American pop culture in the post-civil rights era, a precarious balance was struck. The eyes see the hustler in his custom Cadillac, take-no-shit masculinity defined through his money and his sexual conquests and the way he throws his weight around; the ears hear a portrayal of that man as "a victim of ghetto demands... been told I can't be nothin' else, just a hustler in spite of myself." Mayfield's "Pusherman"-- along with Willie Hutch's "Brother's Gonna Work It Out", Bobby Womack's "Across 110th Street", James Brown's "Down and Out in New York City", and many other songs-- represents that contradiction as part of Soul Jazz's 2xCD, 34-track collection Can You Dig It? The Music and Politics of Black Action Films 1968-1975. And because it's such a wide-ranging collection for its size, this box tells a thorough story just through the names on the back. You have stars at their peak, up-and-comers, fusion icons, jazz innovators turned soundtrack specialists, and a few composers who adapted to the genre from the outside. (The theme to The Soul of Nigger Charley, for instance, was written by Don Costa a few years after he produced and arranged Frank Sinatra's rendition of "My Way".) But this collection's personality doesn't just come through the motley collection of musical backgrounds and career arcs represented in the personnel, and the songs on Can You Dig It? run a gamut of moods and themes even broader than the movies that spawned them. The aforementioned social-conscience numbers stand out; "Freddie's Dead" and "Across 110th Street" in particular are peerless when it comes to fusing cool, resilient poise and deep, desperate sorrow. And there are a few choice examples of the other big musical trope to come out of the genre-- the wave of "introducing the badass" title themes that followed in the wake of "Shaft", flashy character sketches of a new epoch of black power-meets-action hero icons. To give you an idea of how varied these could be, check out the themes for two different Pam Grier vehicles: Ayers' "Coffy Is the Color" uses the protagonist's name as a jumping-off point to riff off an abstract awareness of blackness as strength ("Coffy is the color of your skin/ Coffy is the world you live in... Coffy is feelin' something deep, yeah"), while Hutch's "Theme of Foxy Brown" falls somewhere between a declaration of the heroine's tough-woman nature and a straight-up mash note ("Oh girl you're cute and you're sweet/ No, but you don't play around"). Still, it should be noted that well over half of the tracks on this collection don't have any lyrics at all, and it's in these instrumental selections that the notions of pimp chic, ghetto struggle, and outsized bad-motherfucker caricature recede into something more nuanced and transformative. The wah-wah pedals, conga drums, and sucker-punch horn stabs of the genre are omnipresent, but with such a glut of films to be scored in such a short period of time, musicians had to constantly outdo themselves and find outlandish ways to be creative. That's how you get Dennis Coffey and Luchi De Jesus overlaying a bizarre, almost kazoo-esque scat-singing chorus over the theme from Black Belt Jones and Marvin Gaye pushing the envelope for 1972's Trouble Man by taking a Moog out of the turf of sci-fi films and A Clockwork Orange to create the bassline for "'T' Plays It Cool". Selections by Ayers ("Aragon"), Quincy Jones ("They Call Me MISTER Tibbs"), and the Blackbyrds ("Wilford's Gone") parallel the developments in jazz-funk's rich crossover period. And uptempo selections like Hayes' tense but funky "Run Fay Run" and "Pursuit of the Pimpmobile", J.J. Johnson's Latin jazz-tinged "Willie Chase", and Grant Green's all-percussion monster "Traveling to Get to Doc" aren't just music to stage car chases by, they're also dancefloor-ready classics that fit neatly into the early, pre-boom phase of disco. Speaking of which, by an odd twist of fate the tone of black cinema mostly shifted from a focus on gunslinging action flicks to comedies and musicals around the same time disco started supplanting soul on the charts, and by 1978-- the same year The Wiz bombed hard enough to scare Hollywood away from big-budget films aimed towards black audiences-- the standard for R&B-star Oscar winners had shifted from Isaac Hayes to Donna Summer. It's a mixed blessing: As the exhaustive, bigger-than-the-CD-case liner-notes book observes, there's a current generation of black directors and actors that have expanded roles far beyond the pimps, dealers, and private eyes of the 70s, but the veterans of that original, hard-fought renaissance period eventually wound up disappearing from both sides of the camera. And yet the music survives as strong as ever, renewed through the lens of the hip-hop generation that grew up with and reinterpreted it. When Spike Lee revisited the early 70s of his childhood for Crooklyn, "Pusherman" resurfaced not as the backdrop for a cocaine kingpin's internal struggles, but the accompaniment for a couple of siblings fighting over a box of Trix and the appearance of a couple of neighborhood glue-sniffers floating through Bed-Stuy upside-down. It worked there, too.