Rejoice:  Rihanna is having fun again. If she's not spilling milk with Drake in a  (impressively spotless) bodega in her "What's My Name?" video, she's  playfully grabbing Nicki Minaj's ass at the American Music Awards or  living out millions of karaoke dreams by singing "Livin' on a Prayer"  with Bon Jovi during a recent show in Madrid. All the while whipping her  neon-stop-sign hair and smiling and throwing up ridiculous devil's  horns. All this just a year after Rated R, her spiked-out  reaction to staggering emotional and physical trauma. And while that  cathartic album provided an outlet for her frustrations and allowed her  to claim some artistic bona fides, the actual songs were often plodding  and weighed down by overwrought melodrama. Not so on Loud, which has the 22-year-old Barbados-born star picking up where 2007's Good Girl Gone Bad left off, doling out effervescent pop like it was her birthright. "Life's  too short to be sittin' around miserable," sings Rihanna with a shrug  on future 2 a.m. staple "Cheers (Drink to That)". "People are gonna talk  whether you're doin' bad or good." The lines sum up the general  sentiment of Loud nicely. There's no grand statement here, no tabloid back story. And while Rihanna had a hand in writing most of the songs on Rated R,  she's not credited with writing anything here. But she's more  experienced, and unlike some of her early material, you feel like she's  actually connecting with these tunes on more than a purely melodic  level. In his review of Good Girl, Pitchfork's Tom Breihan wrote that  Rihanna "comes off sounding like a robot programmed to impersonate  Alanis Morissette." And the acoustic strums and mid-tempo drum beat--  not to mention the vocal sample of Avril Lavigne's "I'm With You"-- on  "Cheers" are particularly Alanis-esque. But now Rihanna is capable of  adding her own West Indian lilt and charisma to the tipsy track-- you  can almost hear her smirk as she brings hashtag rap to pop&B: "It's  gettin' Coyote Ugly up in here/ No Tyra!" After releasing five  albums in as many years, the singer is closer than ever to becoming the  complete pop package Jay-Z envisioned when he signed her the same day  she walked into Def Jam during his tenure as president. Though gifted  with runway-ready looks, Rihanna has improved in other areas through  sheer perseverance. Her voice-- once fragile and shrill-- is now robust  enough to take on songs like the delightfully Eurotrash pounder "Only  Girl (In the World)" not only on record but at high profile awards-show  performances. Her semi-scripted dance moves are sultry and spontaneous.  She can be kinda funny (or at least genuinely excitable) in interviews.  She'll never be as boldly talented as Beyoncé or freakishly engaging as  Gaga, but there's still charm to be found in her (relatively) everyday  affability. She recently said Loud was the first album she wasn't nervous about releasing, which makes a lot of sense. She's worked hard to get to this point. If  anything, the record sounds too easy at times. "California King Bed" is  a "I Don't Want to Miss a Thing"-type power ballad genetically engineered  to soundtrack a bi-coastal Kate Hudson rom-com. "Raining Men" is a  shameless Beyoncé rip-off that would be quickly dismissed if not for the  fact that it's a pretty-damn-good Beyoncé rip off with a  characteristically scene-stealing guest verse from Nicki Minaj.  Meanwhile, "Fading" copies Rihanna's own lightweight R&B formula so much  it's redundant. On the flip, "Man Down" takes her violent side to its  logical conclusion as it finds her on the run after killing a poor guy  dead, its reggae bounce matching perfectly with Rihanna's mesmerizing  cadence. And "Skin" is her sexiest song yet, a haunted, near-dubstep  stunner that wouldn't sound totally out of place on Massive Attack's Mezzanine. Her laissez-faire attitude toward hit-making on Loud can result in too-safe moves or semi-experiments that come off  surprisingly great, but, at this rate, by the time she runs out of  singles from this record there will be another one ready to go. More  than a stocking stuffer but less than an idol, Rihanna has grown into one of  the most reliable pop stars we've got.