Frank  Ocean is a 23-year-old New Orleans-born, Beverly Hills-based singer  who's in the gleefully hedonistic hip-hop  collective Odd Future Wolf Gang Kill Them All. Frank Ocean is also known  as Christopher "Lonny" Breaux, a songwriter who has helped pen tracks for Justin Bieber,  John Legend, and Brandy over the last few years. He's the latest  example of why the major label system is crumbling at the knees of  Twitter and Tumblr, too. After getting signed to Island Def Jam about a year  ago, the label proceeded to ignore him. Until February 16, that is.  That's when Ocean decided to give away his debut album, Nostalgia, Ultra, for free on his Tumblr. Venting  about his decision to drop the record his own way, he took to Twitter on March 1: "i. did. this. not ISLAND DEF JAM. that's why you see no  label logo on the artwork that I DID. guess its my fault for trusting my  dumbass lawyer and signing my career over to a failing company. fuck  Def Jam & any company that goes the length of signing a kid with  dreams & talent w/ no intention of following through. fuck em. now  back to my day. i want some oatmeal and toast. brunch swag." The  mini-rant sums up this singer's demeanor well-- openly passionate and  heartfelt, but also attractively off-center and humble. Nostalgia, Ultra finds Ocean singing over a mix of  original pop-leaning R&B beats courtesy of big-ticket producers  like Tricky Stewart (Rihanna's "Umbrella", Beyonce's "Single Ladies (Put a Ring On It)") and Midi Mafia (50 Cent's "21 Questions", Justin Bieber's "Down to Earth") as well as some eclectic remakes of songs including Coldplay's underrated 2009 single "Strawberry Swing", MGMT's  "Electric Feel", and, most surprisingly, the Eagles' "Hotel  California". Ocean's experience within the major-label hit machine comes  through-- his casually hook-y voice is akin to Usher or Jamie Foxx's,  and at least three of the album's songs could (and should) slot in  comfortably on a R&B or even Top 40 radio station near you any day now. There  are distinct elements of Drake's melancholic paranoia and The-Dream's high melodrama, too. But there's also a heady surreality surrounding  Nostalgia, Ultra that makes it unique. The cover-- showing a  bright orange 1980s BMW (Ocean's "dream car") hidden in plain sight  amidst lush greenery-- is perfectly indicative of what's inside. The record is held together by tiny interludes named after 1990s video games in which the unmistakable sounds of a cassette player rewinding, fast-forwarding, and stopping are heard. The old-school touch lends Nostalgia, Ultra the feel of a personal, friend-to-friend mixtape  rather than one made by a name-dropping hip-hop DJ. The  impressionistic, fingerprint details don't stop there. On the brief  segue "Bitches Talkin'", a loving snippet of Radiohead's "Optimistic" is heard while Ocean sincerely laments how "all bitches want is Jodeci, what the fuck?"-- not exactly the type of sentiment you'd expect to hear on any sort of R&B album. Meanwhile, Nicole Kidman's adulterous bedroom soliloquy from Stanley Kubrick's Eyes Wide Shut can be heard underneath the murderous "Lovecrimes", adding a sense of manic dread. The film is once again referenced on the nightmarish, Stewart-produced "Novacane", which has Ocean losing his senses in the company of a wannabe dentist/porn star he met at Coachella. And if that sounds kind of ridiculous, that's probably the point; the atmospheric track almost reads like a knowing parody of Kid Cudi's  fame-as-drug diatribes. The shout outs to Kubrick's mysterious and  lusty final masterpiece aren't just artsy braggadocio-- they make sense  within Ocean's trickily complex world, too. Like on brooding highlight "Swim  Good", where he steers his Lincoln Town Car straight into California's  crashing waves. "I'm about to drive in the ocean," he sings,  heart-battered. "I'ma try to swim from something bigger than me." He lightens up on the self-reflexive pop winner "Songs for Women" and the MGMT-sampling  Garden of Eden fuck ode "Nature Feels", but, no matter the mood, this songwriter is always  quick to add fine particulars that make his songs his songs. At  23, Ocean is a few years older than his mostly-teenage friends in Odd  Future. And his maturity is apparent not only in his vastly more  laid-back style but also in how he deals with the underlying sense of  abandonment and rejection that ignites much of Odd Future's bloody,  cuss-laden vengeance. "Fuck a deal, I just want my father's e-mail so I  can tell him how much I hate him in detail," seethes crew leader Tyler, the Creator on the title track of his album Bastard.  Ocean grew up fatherless too, according to his wrenching revamp of Mr. Hudson's  "There Will Be Tears", but he handles his feelings differently. "My  friend said it wasn't so bad/ You can't miss what you ain't had/ Well, I  can-- I'm sad," he wails, letting his guard down completely. And the  fact that Tyler and Frank are smart enough to see their thematic kinship  beneath all the aesthetic disparities bodes well for both.