Even the most optimistic fan might not have been able to foresee the long-term vitality of Miles Davis' posthumous catalog. Thanks to multi-disc box sets that have unearthed all the (thrilling) studio sessions that went into iconic fusion albums such as In a Silent Way, Bitches Brew, Jack Johnson, and On the Corner—as well as Columbia's more recent focus on unissued live performances in its Miles Davis Bootleg Series—the trumpeter-composer has remained an ever-renewable resource in the catalog. (If the branding reminds you of the label's back-pages approach to Bob Dylan, you're not wrong.) On the whole, this feels appropriate, especially when the artist under consideration created and then ditched exciting new stylistic languages with Picasso-like abandon. But a nagging question also hovers around each new deluxe set to come off the 21st Century assembly line: How long can the party last, before we get into the realm of record-company rehash? Unlike "Bootleg Series" sets that are more easily understood as essential, this four-disc volume strides through different decades of the Davis story. So at the outset, we get crisp, acoustic-instrument performances of tunes like "'Round Midnight", while at the far end of the box, we're delivered to the high-humidity atmospheres of the rock-tinged, experimental funk of Davis' 1970s lineups. The set's connecting thread is the Newport Jazz Festival—the legendary, still-running summer concert stage that Davis first stepped onto in 1955 (as a member of a brief "All-Star Jam" that included Thelonious Monk). Later in that decade, Davis took a hard-bop sextet (including John Coltrane and Bill Evans) to Newport, not long before it went into the studio to cut Kind of Blue. Are these early Davis appearances at Newport classic? Of course. But in the main, the music on the first disc of this box has been available for a while. As has a nearly half-hour portion of this volume's third disc (recently included on the album Bitches Brew Live). Moreover, while Davis certainly made a point of getting his various groups to the Newport festival—both its U.S. and foreign-touring iterations—there's little sense that the destination much influenced his fast-moving aesthetic development. (Unlike, say, the post-Summer of Love concerts at the Fillmore collected in the third Davis Bootleg Series release.) So instead of being wall-to-wall necessary, this Bootleg Series edition is simply three-quarters-revelatory. But what is legitimately new here is as good as anything else in the Davis-rarity series. The second disc gives us multiple, intense sets by the trumpeter's "second great quintet," which traveled to Newport in both 1966 and 1967. The back-to-back sequencing of these performances shows how fast Davis' music was developing, even from within a particular lineup. (Compare the thrashing, second version of "Gingerbread Boy", from the 1967 date, to the more restrained 1966 iteration.) And the final disc's rarely-heard 1971 band—including Keith Jarrett on electric piano—puts its own spin on some of Davis' most familiar fusion-era tunes (including a cool-strutting "Bitches Brew" that leads into a majestic, slow-burning "Funky Tonk"). The powerhouse performance in the box, however—a true drop-everything-and-call-your-friends-over-to-listen concert—is a 47-minute stretch on disc three, which puts the spotlight on a 1973 Davis band that would later go on to form the core of the ensemble on the live album Dark Magus. For some connoisseurs, Dark Magus represents Davis' point of peak-fusion—propulsive, densely textured, and grooving. But one thing that recording also has is longueurs. (It was a double-album, after all.) The 1973 gig included in this box isn't just more compact, it's nervier, too. While Pete Cosey's wild electric guitar pyrotechnics sound great on Dark Magus, his playbook of liquid licks also feels fully figured out—it's a command performance by a Davis group member who has had years to drill this particular music. By contrast, his playing on "Turnaroundphrase", the opening tune from this newly issued 1973 set, is more darting in nature, and alive with the sound of the guitarist figuring out a way through Davis' ferocious composition. Likewise, soprano saxophonist Dave Liebman—the only acoustic axe in this lineup—sounds as though he's fighting his way toward a state of audibility. When his keening playing joins up with Davis's own wah-wah-enhanced trumpet moans, the sound reaches flourishes of intensity that rival (and perhaps eclipse) those on Dark Magus. (The 1973 set is such a different-sounding beast, it hardly matters that its setlist is largely similar to that of the latter album.) The liner notes included with this Bootleg Series release refer to Davis' "heath challenges" during this period, and his reduced range on the trumpet. And yet the 1973 gig still shows Davis' bandleading and arranging skills to be working at a high level, hard living be damned. Despite the fact that those talents weren't intimately connected to the Newport Festival, particularly, they lend this box set a stable, running theme—whether Davis is leading his sextet with Coltrane, his second quintet, or else the various fusion lineups represented here. You can quibble with the inclusion of familiar material in a Bootleg Series package, but you can't argue—not yet, at least—with the unreleased depths of the Davis vault.