As fans of the early-’90s television series and film well know, “Twin Peaks” is a staging ground for conflict between two supernatural locations (or “lodges,” or something). In a famously wigged-out dream sequence, at the the close of the show’s third episode, FBI Special Agent Dale Cooper hears an early clue suggesting the nature of this mysterious peril: “One chants out between two worlds: ‘Fire walk with me.’” But by then, the show's soundtrack has already revealed that this town in rural Washington is being manipulated by competing forces. The contest between them is demonstrated every few minutes, thanks to a sweetly naive motif ("Twin Peaks Theme") that can quickly give way to an unsettlingly morbid riff ("Laura Palmer's Theme"). One goes heavy on the piano’s white keys; the other meditates over some black ones.   As the show’s mix of humor and tragedy unfolds, these two compositions guide a viewer’s ability to perceive which mood is holding greater sway. A pleasant moment may end with a startling musical suggestion of horror. Or two characters locked in mutual grief may suddenly find something to laugh about. Situated like the narrative itself between the two worlds pulling on the town of Twin Peaks, the music of the show is eternally with the characters—and the viewers. Series co-creator David Lynch has always displayed a musician’s facility for nimble, suggestive sound arrangements, going back to his first feature film, Eraserhead. But the potency of his soundtracks hit a new level after the director crossed paths with composer Angelo Badalamenti in the 1980s. Badalamenti contributed original compositions to Lynch’s Blue Velvet and played piano during the performance of the titular pop song. For the first season of “Twin Peaks,” he wrote all the music, with Lynch providing lyrics to tunes sung by Julee Cruise. In addition to the two mood-setting triumphs that anchor the first season soundtrack to “Twin Peaks,” Badalamenti also came up with brilliant evocations of the show’s various dramatic modes. The bluesy “Freshly Squeezed” defines the show’s approach to seduction. “Dance of the Dream Man” captures the finger-snapping swing of its surreality. Some of the tracks serve multiple purposes, like “Audrey’s Dance,” which starts out as an accessory to chic sleuthing, then stretches out into a dreamy organ drone punctuated by blasts of saxophone and a lascivious clarinet. In these performances, the composer’s keyboard is frequently the star, though jazz drummer Grady Tate’s rhythms are another consistent highlight. Without his subtle, driving percussion, Badalamenti’s mixture of vintage pop and jazz sonics—at once familiar and plenty strange—might not have come off nearly so well.  A great score doesn’t have to play well as an album on its own terms. But this one does. Its tunes are so appealing, Lynch sometimes rips them from their status as commentary on the show’s action and places this music directly into the narrative world. Badalamenti’s pieces show up in jukeboxes that the characters use and in performances by local musicians at the town’s watering holes. When Agent Cooper tries to remember a portion of that crucial dream, he snaps his fingers to the rhythm of the music that originally accompanied the images in his head. If the characters get to listen to the music all the time, why not fans of the show? During the first wave of “Twin Peaks” mania, its opening theme won a Grammy, while the soundtrack album charted on Billboard. The new edition—licensed by Warner Bros. to the boutique Death Waltz label—features a new vinyl remaster by Tal Miller. Compared to the first CD edition of the album, this version gives greater definition to all the parts of a collage-style piece like “The Bookhouse Boys” (which blends in a bit of “Dance of the Dream Man”). Elsewhere, the vinyl remaster is more subtly useful than it is revelatory. Which is as it should be, since this music has never sounded thin or in need of help. The vinyl packaging promises a forthcoming reissue of the soundtrack to the movie—Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me—that followed the show’s cancellation by ABC. Equally needed are new editions of the show’s second-season soundtrack, as well as Julee Cruise’s album Floating Into the Night (which overlaps with the first-season album a bit, and also contains material from the show that didn’t make this set). But since the “Twin Peaks” revival is still in its early stages, ahead of Showtime’s planned third season in 2017, there's still plenty of time to obsess over those recordings, down the road. For now, the first soundtrack's deft combination of romance and menace provides a stunning reminder of everything Lynch and his co-creator Mark Frost dreamed up the first time around.