
    DJ Clue might've managed to go platinum once, but the
    history of mixtape DJs who release officially licensed albums is dubious. Guys
    like Clue and Funkmaster Flex always seem to coax an impressive-on-paper lineup
    of rappers onto their vanity projects, but they're only getting dregs and
    outtakes, the tracks and verses that weren't good enough to go on the rappers'
    own albums. And since the albums aren't really mixtapes, they're subject to all
    the troublesome sample-clearance headaches and focus-grouped micromanaging that
    mixtapes always manage to avoid. In short, they're the worst of both worlds. 
    So it's almost shocking that DJ Khaled, the Palestinian-American Miami radio
    and mixtape DJ, has managed to put out a remarkably consistent album.
    Especially when you consider that his actual mixtapes tend to be
    slogs and that his vocal-drop shouting is almost as obnoxious as Clue's. The
    difference isn't in the rapping; Khaled's guests skew heavily Southern, but
    everyone is still pretty much on autopilot. There are a few exceptions. Bun B
    manages to elevate "Gangsta Shit" above a standard showcase for Young
    Jeezy's boring CTE posse through sheer force of will. Twista impresses by
    fitting the word "antidisestablishmentarianism" into one of his breakneck
    speed-raps. Kanye West gets back into his irrepressibly egotistical
    pimp-stride: "Hi, haters/ I'm back off hiatus/ I feel just like you/ I
    mean, even I hate us." And even after the "Kiss Ya Ass Goodbye"
    remix, it's still an unexpected pleasure hearing Beanie Sigel and Jadakiss on
    the same track, spitting absolute gutter shit: "Get serious, I'd gladly
    involve ya moms/ Al-Qaeda Jada, I'm only involved with bombs." But that's
    to be expected: When you've got a guest-list as long and impressive as
    Khaled's, you're going to get a few good lyrical moments even if no one's
    really trying. 
    What elevates the awkwardly titled Listennn...The Album is the one thing
    no officially released mixtape has had before now: a consistent aesthetic.
    Miami has always been the place where New York rappers go on vacation, and it's
    also home to the dependably great Slip-N-Slide stable, but lately it's started
    to feel like the center of the rap world. Florida producers like Cool &
    Dre, the Runners, and Khaled himself have developed a style that fully
    integrates some of the best elements of Houston screw, Italo-disco, freestyle,
    electro, epic synthpop, the hard-plastic post-bounce that Slip-N-Slide's house
    producers have been doing for years, and even (sometimes) New York rap. It's a
    strikingly sleek, epic, and versatile approach, and Khaled takes full
    advantage, commissioning tracks from most of the region's best beatmakers.
    Beanie and Jada's "Problem" unites buzzing synths with horror-movie
    pianos, and "Watch Out" lets Akon get his Phil Collins on over
    streaky Miami Vice keyboards. But the clear standout is the über-propulsive
    posse cut "Holla at Me", which slows down a sample from Afrika
    Bambaataa's "Looking for the Perfect Beat" enough that its
    oscillating beeps have room to breathe while Lil Wayne, Paul Wall, Fat Joe,
    Rick Ross, and Pitbull put their heads down and ride the beat beautifully.
    Club-rap doesn't get a whole lot better than that.
    